# The Future Pay: Analysis on the Potential Effects of Increasing Minimum Wage in the Philippines

<h3> Introduction </h3>

Households in extreme poverty and low-income families in the Philippines struggle and suffer as they lack access to valuable assets and basic necessities, resulting in hunger, unemployment, and restricted access to sustain their everyday lives. They mainly rely on one of their family member's hard work, beg on the street, and sometimes do things that can generate income merely to live. Some are forced to endure their situations and skip their meals just to ensure that their earnings are sufficient for them to last a week. However, there are also government initiatives and services available to help them, such as the Pantawid Pamilya Pilipino Program (4Ps) to alleviate their needs. But usually, to survive their situation, they will need to work day and night to prolong productivity and get higher pays because of the low minimum wage mandated by the Law. The minimum wage is really important because it establishes the lowest compensation that a business may pay its  employees in order to provide them with social security and help raise their standard of living. The Philippines is considered as one of the worst countries to live on minimum wage since we have one of the lowest minimum pay rankings among all countries (Picodi, 2020). Under the current labor regulations of DOLE, minimum wages in the Philippines have remained unchanged at Php 537/ day from 2019 to the present,  which is insufficient to meet basic necessities such as food, water, health, education, and electricity, especially in light of the pandemic and rising commodity prices in the market today.
 
In this light, the analysis of this study focuses on its objectives to develop a labor policy and recommendation of an action plan for raising the minimum wage of the Filipinos, which will not only help combat poverty and unemployment in the Philippines but will also encourage economic growth and development in the country. Changes to minimum wages are necessary to sustain its relevance in fluctuating economic and social realities from time to time. The goal of this project is to also encourage more Filipinos to stay in the Philippines and work for our own country, which again will empower and benefit the Philippines by providing possibilities for growth to our economy and optimizing the Filipino skills and intelligence that we have rather than going abroad away from their families and sometimes experience kinds of discrimination and abuse. Decentralized wage setting was thought to be a more efficient approach for several reasons. In general, a decentralized system allows for minimum wages to be better aligned with local preferences and labor market conditions, which differ by regions.

A typical profit maximizing firm in this situation expands its number of workers for as long as the cost of hiring an additional worker is less than the additional revenue he produces for the firm. That is to say, a firm will hire additional workers for as long as they add to the firm’s profit. It stops hiring when the firm can no longer earn additional profit from hiring more workers. At this point, the firm no longer has any incentive to expand employment. At break-even, therefore, the wage rate a worker receives from the firm (fixed by the market, not minimum) is equal to the value of his contribution to the firm’s total revenue.To round out the discussion in this section, we agree that worker protection is desirable not only for its social value but also for facilitating skills formation. Ensuring workers of their respective jobs creates incentives for them to learn more firm-specific skills and in the process be more productive. Protectionism, however, can be overdone and cause deleterious effects on the industry, and hence increase unemployment and eventually reduce skill formation. Just like medicine, when abused, it can
be worse than the disease.

Minimum wage is the lowest pay that employers can offer their workers for the work that they perform or for the services that they render. Equivalently, it is the lowest wage at which workers are allowed to sell their labor. Standard economic theory predicts that increases in minimum wage can lead to lower employment and higher prices. These effects of the minimum wage have important consequences for the welfare of households, mainly lowincome households, which the minimum wage is trying to protect. The literature on minimum wage in the Philippines is limited and it is mostly on its employment effects. This study looked at the potential impact of changes in minimum wage on prices. On one hand, results from the empirical exercises indicate that increases in the minimum wage, on average, have an impact on regional prices, although at a relatively small degree. Given that the estimated increase in regional CPI is observed to be relatively small, this may not lead to inflationary pressures. Moreover, minimum wage adjustments are undertaken only once a year – unless there are supervening circumstances – and thus may not result in wage push inflation. 

<h3> Problem Statement </h3>

**Growing Rate of Labor Migration.** Based on a survey conducted by the World Economic Forum in 2019, the Philippine youth still prefers to work overseas owing to the country's high unemployment rate, better opportunities,  higher salaries and higher minimum wage given in other countries compared to working here. It is evident that economic growth in the Philippines is quite low since Filipinos choose to work abroad granting them more gains and expansion for other nations while leaving our own country behind in terms of economic progress. 

**Unemployment Rate falls but Job Quality worsens.** Another problem is that the Philippine labor population is not completely employed since a certain number of "working-age" Filipinos in the country are either unemployed or underemployed, at almost twice the level of our neighbouring countries. According to the Labor Force Survey performed by the Philippine Statistics Authority in January 2022, 2.93 million Filipinos are unemployed at 6.4 percent, which is excellent news because it indicates a decrease from the percentage recorded the previous year. However, when compared to other nations, the Philippines' unemployment rate appears to be high, necessitating additional analysis and attention. This also suggests that the higher the unemployment rate, the more difficult it is for Filipinos to satisfy their basic necessities. The visible underemployment rate, defined as the proportion of those working less than 40 hours per week who expressed a desire to work more hours in their current job, find another job, or find a new job with longer working hours, was estimated to be 9.8 percent in December 2021, down from 11.5 percent in November of the same year. Filipinos are losing morale as a result of the unemployment situation, as well as the low wages they are receiving. With such a low minimum salary, what do you believe Filipinos do in their daily lives?

 **Growing Population and Poverty.** Another concern here is the rising percentage of poverty among poor Filipinos whose income per capita is inadequate to cover their basic needs, which was estimated at 23.7 percent or the equivalent of 26.14 million Filipinos whose living below the poverty line (Dennis Mapa, 2021). This is because even if some members of poor households work, they still get P537/day which is incapable of meeting the everyday needs of a single household, according to the Picodi study in 2020.

<h3> Significance of the Proposed Project </h3>

The proposed project intends to address this issue, as well as the contry's minimum wage and poverty rate. This research is highly significant to the following recipients:

**To the citizens and the community.** To the citizens and the community. This project allows them to have an insight into the trends with regards to the issues. They needed to be able to attain knowledge of the key benefits they can attain once the issues are addressed. It would allow the citizens and the community to be educated and have their rights to labor more protected.

**To the Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) and the government.** This project enables them to have useful information for the improvement and alignment of their policies. They can strengthen their laws and norms even further, as well as the concreteness of their initiatives. The government can serve as a link between citizens and opportunities by acting as a bridge, especially among those in the poor sector. The project will be beneficial to them because it will allow them to provide better service to the people while also raising awareness. With this, they will gain more knowledge about this matter and will help them choose and decide whats the best for everyone. 
 
**To the Filipino workers and employees.** The result of the project creates a better understanding of the key factors and benefits of the adjusted minimum wage fare for workers and employees. This project will assist in making every worker aware of the changes that a wage increase can bring. The information formed is utilized to increase employees' awareness and attention to the problem of the minimum wage in the Philippines. This will greatly benefit the filipino workers and employees because this can help them understand more about the matters affecting the wage they can earn from working.
 
**To the future researchers**. The information and analysis made by the team can be used for a more in-depth understanding of the phenomenon. This project will act as a guide and a source of support for future research. The project will certainly give them a good background and overview of the analysis and effects of the minimum wage in the Philippines especially the factors affecting it. 

<h3> Methods </h3>

The researchers will be using the datasets available provided by the Philippine Statistics Authority to assess and predict the possible effects of increasing the minimum wage in the Philippines and determine whether it is effective, feasible or not. The datasets to be used include the Poverty Rate among the population of Poor Filipinos whose per capita income is inadequate for their livelihood, which can also be used to compare and assess other countries’ poverty rates whose minimum wage is sufficient for their living and necessities, based on the report conducted by Picodi. Furthermore, this study will use a dataset that includes statistics for the unemployment rate reported in the Philippines as well as determining the significant correlation that it has in relation to the Philippines' minimum wage, in comparison to other nations, in order to identify the potential impact it provides, upon increasing the minimum wage for its people.

The approaches for analyzing the mentioned datasets and their relevant relationships with one another are as follows:

Statistical analysis will be utilized by the researchers which comprise data collection of all relevant details needed to evaluate and assess the factors that may affect the increase in the minimum wage. This technique will also be used to quantify all of the obtained data and perform different statistical operations to see whether the cost of a country's minimum wage influences the unemployment and poverty percentages reported. The use of predictive analysis would also be used to identify critical patterns and trends in order to predict what potential effects might occur if the Philippines increased its minimum wage through competitive differentiation and comparison with other countries that have a sufficient minimum wage for its nation.

Specifically, the researchers would also employ Regression Analysis to test for the significance of discontinuity between the treatment and control groups to be allocated. Since evaluating the potential effects of a minimum wage increase will be our primary focus, this technique will help us understand how one variable is affected by another, whether it will remain the same or change, giving us a better understanding of their relationships, allowing us to anticipate possible outcomes and suggest various courses of action and recommendations for the government based on the given result in the future.

Lastly, the researchers will use Python as their primary programming language in order to perform better classification and statistical analysis as it's flexible and can handle complicated datasets available for analysis.

<h3> Expected Output </h3>

The goal of this project is to generate fact-based information that will be used to gain a better understanding of the impact of the minimum wage on Filipinos' lives. This project is designed to improve the interpretation and understanding of the data collected through better visualization of concepts and ideas that are easier to grasp and understand by analyzing the significant impact of the Philippines' low minimum wage on poverty and unemployment rates, which are two of the most pressing challenges facing the country today. Also, this will provide a clearer picture of the potential effects if the government raises the minimum wage for Filipino employees in the future and determine whether it would be favorable or not in order to help eliminate the aforementioned issues. The team will then create a labor policy and recommendation for an action plan based on the gathered data, which will include all of the benefits and drawbacks of the minimum wage rise. The data that will be collected and tested will serve as the criteria for deciding whether or not to reform and implement the convention and policy against the minimum wage in the Philippines. However, regardless of the result of the analysis of the datasets presented, this will be used to promote awareness of policies, norms, and suggestions will still be delivered and communicated to the entire nation to assess and evaluate what action should be taken next. The project's outcomes would address the challenges surrounding the country's minimum wage, as well as its implications for the business process, labor code, and labor market. This helps the team design strategies for the betterment of the nation that are just and match the needs of every Filipino. This initiative provides the project's conclusion, summary, and recommendation to everyone, and notably to those most concerned about the country's minimum wage.
